---
layout: post
title: "race, math, and computers (part 1)"
date: 2020-06-02
---

Originally, I had planned on continuing a survey of graphical networks this week, but instead I'm going to take some time to write down and organize all the racing thoughts I've had in the last few days. This weekend has been a painful, eye-opening, devastating week for many--some more than others. The deaths of <a href="https://www.nytimes.com/article/ahmaud-arbery-shooting-georgia.html">Ahmaud Arbery,</a> <a href="https://www.nytimes.com/article/breonna-taylor-police.html">Breonna Taylor,</a> <a href="https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/31/us/george-floyd-investigation.html">George Floyd,</a> and <a href="https://www.cnn.com/2020/06/01/us/louisville-protests-man-shot-dead/index.html">David McAtee</a> are only a few identified people amongst a mass of unnamed victims of institutionalized violence in America. As an POC, woman, and first-generation American I am going to use this time to assess, reflect on, and move towards changing my internal biases, as well as figure out what I can do to actively engage in anti-racism.

<!--excerpt-->

I won't go into the details of these terrible incidents because I am not a journalist and there are <a href="https://www.cnn.com/us/live-news/george-floyd-protests-06-02-20/index.html">tons</a> <a href="https://www.nytimes.com/2020/06/02/us/george-floyd-video-autopsy-protests.html?action=click&pgtype=Article&state=default&module=styln-george-floyd&variant=show&region=TOP_BANNER&context=storylines_menu">of</a> <a href="https://time.com/section/us/">resources</a> <a href="https://www.vox.com/">online</a> to read and digest all the recent events. Instead, I'm going to acknowledge my background as an Asian American first-generation immigrant woman studying math and computer science in the United States' private education system, and look at how my personal priveleges and POC identity affects the status of my own community and other minority communities in the USA. My goal is to finally start <i>actively</i> and <i>consciously</i> making an effort to engange on racial issues in America--something that I should have started doing a long, long time ago.

<h3>thoughts on complicity</h3>
I grew up in a suburb of Central Jersey, right outside of Princeton, where I attend university. My parents immigrated here in the late 90's to chase "the American Dream." From this short description of myself, I can already see the various privileges in my undisturbed upbringing, even though I never considered myself wealthy or socially advantaged as a child. Privilege was something my family never discussed--we were immigrants, so our life in America was contingent on working hard to build ourselves up from scratch. The narrative is familiar to many Asian Americans: study hard--get good grades in school--become a doctor, lawyer, or engineer--and you will live a good life (it is, however, important to note that there are many Asians in America who also live in under-resourced communities but that is a separate discussion in its own right). This step-by-step guide to life never taught me to pay attention to the preexisting conditions in America that supported my lifestyle, nor did it motivate me to look beyond my own community and participate in the larger social discussions occurring in America. As a result, I and many of my friends forgot about the importance of political participation. Instead, we silently enjoyed the benefits of the other people's activism and discourse. This is how I have come to be complicit.

Since I have never lived in a disadvantaged or underprivileged community, I cannot pretend I understand the problems and injustices faced in those communities. However, I can speak to the shortcomings of communities I am actively involved in--namely, academia in math and computer science, and the Chinese American experience. I hope that I can use my observations in these contexts to to better understand what I can do to combat anti-Black, anti-Asian and general racism.

<h3>race in mathematics</h3>
Race and academics is one of the few issues with which I have lived in close proximity. In 2015, my school district became the center of <a href="https://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/26/nyregion/reforms-to-ease-students-stress-divide-a-new-jersey-school-district.html">a heated debate that largely divided along racial lines.</a> This debate did not directly touch on larger racial inequalities in America, but it did refuel some sentiments amongst Asian immigrants that Americans look down on us and seek to exclude us despite our efforts to assimilate and work hard. Much of this dialogue centers around education, particularly college admissions. Nearly all Asian Americans I know are deeply familiar with the <a href="https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/18/nyregion/Black-students-nyc-high-schools.html">racial disparities found in New York's elite high schools</a> and especially the <a href="https://www.npr.org/2019/10/01/730386096/federal-judge-rules-in-favor-of-harvard-in-admissions-case">controversial affirmative action case between Harvard and Students For Fair Admissions (SFFA).</a> In fact, the latter example was also a large source of racial conflict between Asian and Black communities, highlighting the deeply ingrained anti-Black feelings harbored in some older and younger Asian generations.

We should all be in support for the Black Lives Matter (BLM) movement. Whether you appeal more to anecdotal or statistical evidence, the evidence showing systemic racial inequality against Black communities is clear, and has been clear. A sentiment I've heard from Asian Americans is that the BLM movement marginalizes Asian American discrimination. I think it's important to emphasize that supporting the BLM movement is <i>not</i> a statement that Asian lives <i>don't</i> matter. I've know my entire life that Asian immigrants<a href="#footnote1"><sup>1</sup></a> include some of the hardest workers in America, and that the sacrifices made by Asian immigrants is indescribable and invaluable towards society. There are a lot of upper class and upper-middle class Asian Americans who worked extremely hard to go from next to nothing to financial stability. However, it is undeniable that our ability to do is in part linked to our subscription to and affection for <a href="https://www.npr.org/sections/codeswitch/2017/04/19/524571669/model-minority-myth-again-used-as-a-racial-wedge-between-asians-and-Blacks">the "model minority" myth.</a> In the process of aligning ourselves with this misconception, we lose sight of the real problem: wide-spread systemic racism, affecting BIPOC (and especially Black people) all across America. One particular issue that I think needs even more dialogue is a problem within the American education system: <b>educational poverty tends to split along racial lines.</b>

The numbers are unmistakeable. <a href="https://nationalequityatlas.org/indicators/School_poverty/By_race~ethnicity:35576/United_States/false/Year(s):2016/School_type:All_public_schools/">In 2016, 25.1% of American public school students attended schools categorized as <i>high-poverty</i>,</a> but this number drops to 15.9% among Asian American and Pacific Islander students and 8.5% in White American students, whereas the percentage increases to 45.5% among Black students and 46.2% among Latino students.<a href="#footnote2"><sup>2</sup></a> The story does not change much after high school. At Harvard University, <a href="https://college.harvard.edu/admissions/admissions-statistics">Asian Americans comprise 25.3% of the admitted class of 2023 while Black students account for only 14.3% and Hispanic or Latino students account for only 12.2%.</a><a href="#footnote3"><sup>3</sup></a> At Princeton University, <a href="https://admission.princeton.edu/how-apply/admission-statistics">Asian Americans account for 24% of the enrolled class of 2023 while Black students and Hispanic or Latino each students account for only 7%.</a> I see these types of statistics circulated a lot, and they clearly depict a troubling picture among private educational institutions--that there are disproportionately fewer Black and Brown minority students.

It's also worth noting the statistics on the other end of the college spectrum. In 2020, <a href="https://www.aacc.nche.edu/research-trends/fast-facts/">26% of students enrolled in community colleges under the American Association of Community Colleges are Hispanic or Latino and 13% are Black, whereas 6% are Asian.</a> Community colleges are accessible and wide-reaching providers of higher education, but are able to access far fewer financial resources than private institutions. The Century Foundation reported that in the 2013 fiscal year, <a href="https://tcf.org/content/report/recommendations-providing-community-colleges-resources-need/?session=1">private four-year research institutions spent five times as much money per full-time equivalent student on average as did community colleges.</a> Money allows institutions to buy books, create studying spaces, and hire dedicated faculty. These things are integral to a quality education and oftentimes community colleges cannot provide them. In my opinion, the <a href="https://www.urban.org/policy-centers/cross-center-initiatives/state-and-local-finance-initiative/state-and-local-backgrounders/police-and-corrections-expenditures#Question1Police">billions of dollars that get spent on policing and correction</a> by local and state governments could be put to much better use funding public schools. Under the current system, <a href="http://www.ascd.org/publications/educational-leadership/may02/vol59/num08/Unequal-School-Funding-in-the-United-States.aspx">the majority of public school funding comes directly from local property taxes.</a> This has led to drastic differences in education quality between wealthy and impoverished districts.

If we go one level deeper and look at specific majors within private and public four-year universities, we can find the same trends repeated and exacerbated within mathematics and computer science departments. From 2000 until 2016, <a href="https://www.mathvalues.org/masterblog/2018/7/9/departmental-turnaround-the-case-of-san-diego-state-university-3ln58-s47wz">the percentage of all bachelor's degrees awarded to Black students rose from about 9% to just over 10%, but the percentage of bachelor's degrees in mathematics awarded to Black students dropped from just over 8% to less than 5%.</a><a href="#footnote4"><sup>4</sup></a> The statistics among faculty is equally imbalanced--<a href="http://www.ams.org/profession/data/cbms-survey/cbms2015-Report.pdf">in 2015, the percentage of Black full-time faculty in PhD mathematics departments at four-year institutions was 1%</a><a href="#footnote5"><sup>5</sup></a> (in an even further breakdown: the percentage of Black <i>female</i> faculty is <1%). The math community has not been the quickest to act on its gender problem--but it has been even slower to address its race problem.

I know it's easy for someone like me to look up some statistics, evaluate them, and regurgitate that analysis in a few paragraphs. This isn't where I want my engagement with these issues to stop, but I think it's the best place for me to start. The tech and math community is probably one that I will be a part of for the rest of my life, and I want to take the long-term movement seriously.

<h3>my experiences with diversity in math</h3>

Inclusion, accessibility and belonging in math is an issue I care about immensely, because I have felt the weight of feeling alone and unbelonging many, many times throughout my time studying math. Even in my own department at school, I have consistently questioned whether I belonged; whether I <i>deserved</i> to be here. Fields of study like math, where natural talent is believed to be a strong factor in one's success, have a notorious reputation for building high barriers to entry. Especially when math departments can attract some of the most quantitatively well-versed students in a school, any "non-prodigy" might feel discouraged at times. But I think there are bigger issues that this guise of academic rigor can hide, especially in terms of representation and accessibility. I dont't want to speak for anyone else, but if I--someone who has had years of access to additional academic resources and experience with mathematics competitions--am inclined to occasionally feel left behind by members of a community in which my non-male peers are grossly underrepresented but my Asian peers are well-represented, then how would a Black student feel in the same space? How would a Black non-male student feel?

One of my friends at Princeton actually declared as a math major during sophomore year but then switched into the philosophy department during her junior year. I first met her at a lunch promoting the participation of women in math. We both took Advanced Graph Theory during the fall semester of my junior year and worked together on our problem sets. She was a great partner and I was so grateful that she took me into her little problem set group (I hadn't known anyone else in the class), and she was also the only Black female student considering majoring in math in our year. But her decision to switch ultimately had more to do with how she felt in the math community at Princeton. For her, being a math major was less desirable than being a philosophy major who went out of her way to take additional math classes. Obviously, this decision has a lot to do with persional passions as well. But it definitely felt like a loss to have one of the few other girls I had met through the math department switch out of the major.

I also tutored a sophomore in MAT 215--Princeton's iconic introductory single-variable analysis class for math majors. This class is notorious for being a lot of work, requiring a lot of time, and also being an all-around rewarding class. At the time, he was deciding between math, physics (respect) and music, but ultimately he told me that math wasn't for him. I didn't try to push him into reconsidering (I am a firm believer that being a math major at without being 100% emotionally invested is a huge mistake), but I did feel a little sad. I felt like I had failed in some ways, although I know it wasn't my job to decide what other people should choose as their major.<a href="#footnote6"><sup>6</sup></a> He never told me in detail how he reached his decision, but we had a few conversations about feelings of discouragment while studying math. Princeton, after all, attracts some of the top-ranked students <i>internationally</i> to its math department, which is not at all a problem in itself but can foster a great deal of imposter syndrome in other students.

Though my sample size is small by nature, in comparing my Black peers' experiences with my own I can sense that there are differences. While I also occasionally feel inadequate and discouraged, I have still been able to find numerous reasons to stay in the department. Obviously there are many reasons why I never choose to leave, but ultimately I attribute my persistence to the friends I've made in the math community, many of who look like me and have similar backgrounds as me. In terms of my ethnicity, there's no reason to "prove" that I belong, which is a phrase I've heard and read in a lot of stories about Black racial tokenization. To put it bluntly, the math community can do better in so many ways. Diversity of both race and gender has long been a problem in math, and there is no reason why these problems should continue. I myself have continued to buy into some of the stereotypes that perpetuate this inequality, and having taken more classes outside of the math classes this past year has given me time and space to address those biases. I definitely don't know everything about the origins and causes of these disparaties, but I think I can make a much better effort at doing so. Next year I will be a senior, and I want to use my remaining time in Princeton to get more involved in the math department's outreach to underclassmen.

<h3>a few resources</h3>
<ul>
  <li><a href="https://www.papermag.com/where-to-donate-protests-minneapolis-2646128317.html?rebelltitem=17#rebelltitem17">How to support BLM protesters</a></li>
  <li><a href="https://reformedmargins.com/asian-american-complicity-in-racism/?fbclid=IwAR086F7xaq7ca65lAqRuTC7-dmpK6ENw6pFd1TjCxstz-05Ld6qcojRrEYk">Asian Americans and complicity in racism</a></li>
  <li><a href="https://lettersforblacklives.com/">Letters for Black Lives</a></li>
  <li><a href="https://www.cnn.com/2017/04/28/us/la-riots-korean-americans/index.html">The 1992 LA riots</a></li>
  <li><a href="https://www.npr.org/sections/codeswitch/2017/04/19/524571669/model-minority-myth-again-used-as-a-racial-wedge-between-asians-and-blacks">The model minority myth</a></li>
</ul>

<br>
<a href="https://sxzhang25.github.io/blog/2020/06/02/race-math-and-computers-pt-2">[Continue reading part 2]</a>


<div class="footnotes">
<hr align="left" size="1">
<section id="footnote1"><sup>1</sup>I can't personally speak for South Asians, because my family is entirely East Asian. However, I know many of my South Asian friends would agree that these issues are relevant to them as well.</section>

<section id="footnote2"><sup>2</sup>On the flip side, 36.1% of AAPI students and 29.0% of White students attended public schools categorized as low-poverty, whereas this number drops to 8.3% among Hispanic or Latino students and 7.6% among Black students.</section>

<section id="footnote3"><sup>3</sup>While these statistics do not provide the entire picture, consider these alongside the Harvard vs. SFFA case.</section>

<section id="footnote4"><sup>4</sup>Meanwhile, the percentage of all bachelor's degrees awarded to Asian American students rose from around 6% to just over 7%, and the percentage of bachelor's degrees in mathematics amongst Asian American students rose from 8% to nearly 11%.</section>

<section id="footnote5"><sup>5</sup>See page 126, Table F.5.</section>

<section id="footnote6"><sup>6</sup>I also realize it's not my prerogative to try and "save" underrepresented minorities from discouragement--I genuinely want talented underclassmen to join the math department, because they can bring so much to the field.</section>
</div>
<br>


