---
layout: post
title: "<i>Data and Goliath</i> and other january reads"
date: 2021-01-31
tags: books misc
refs:
---

A few weeks ago, I decided to get a library card. This isn't my first library card (that would be quite sad given how close I've lived to one), and it wasn't because of a new year's resolution to read more in 2021 either. I just suddenly felt compelled to get back into books, without any goals, terms or obligations. I was also suffering from a little more eyestrain than I usually do from all the screen time in 2020, so I figured that this might help. I ended up reading more than I expected in the last month.

<!--excerpt-->

A bit of background on me as a reader: I'm not an avid one. Growing up, I read all the required readings in school, the collection of series that made it into the cornerstone of popular young adult series (Harry Potter, Percy Jackson, etc.) and I went through the occasional random phase of intense, late-night page-flipping. Books were fine, but I was a very visual person and I loved <i>seeing</i> things--I could remember the details in a painting or film I saw last month much better than I could remember what I read five minutes ago. Since I started this blog, however, I've really wanted to improve my writing. Reading seemed to be the best way to do that.

Over the past year, I've slowly begun diversifying what I read online--dry and straight-to-the-point news articles, free-thinking op-eds, stream-of-consciousness blog posts, long-form essays on various topics. But in terms of books, I probably read only two books cover to cover last year. I believe I acquired a bit of a book fear: I was afraid of feeling a sense of failure from starting a book I might not end up liking, and consequently giving up on it. Of course, that's silly. We can't possibly like every book we come across, and we leave online articles unfinished all the time without any guilt. No one should be wasting time on a book they don't enjoy, and stopping early is simply doing yourself a favor. Turns out, I'm not as picky as I thought either--so far I haven't run into this scenario.

So that's my take on reading, and why I decided to do it again. Maybe it's just another temporary phase, and I'll have forgotten all about my library card by the end of next month. But who knows, maybe it'll stick for a lot longer.

<h3><i>Data and Goliath: The Hidden Battles to Collect Your Data and Control Your World</i> by Bruce Schneier</h3>

Back when I was a young and eager freshman during the fall of 2017, I enrolled in a seminar called "Big Brothers are Watching You: Internet Security and Privacy" as one of the first five classes I would ever take in college. The course was taught by my then first-year academic advisor, Professor Brian Kernighan. Yes, <a href="https://www.cs.princeton.edu/~bwk/">that Brian Kernighan</a>--co-author of the first book on C programming, contributer to the development of Unix, inventor of the beloved <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%22Hello,_World!%22_program#/media/File:Hello_World_Brian_Kernighan_1978.jpg">hello world</a> program and all around wonderful teacher. On the reading list for that class was this book, written by tech policy and security guru <a href="https://www.schneier.com/">Bruce Schneier</a>. Three years later, I finally got around to actually finishing it.

The seminar, which was three hours long on a Tuesday afternoon and mostly discussion-based, touched on a range of topics from mass data surveillance to cryptography to Internet security protocols. For a good portion of the semester, we discussed the dangers and trade-offs between government and corporate surveillance and the right to data privacy. A core component of this discussion was the role of tech policy and appropriate legislation to ensure that basic right. All of this is touched on in Schneier's book, which is a very accessible read--some combination of a TED talk, an exposé and a scientific blog post.

Schneier makes the case for digital privacy in a world where it is increasingly undervalued. His grand thesis is that digital privacy is in the interest of both individual liberty and national security, with the core opposition to this philosophy being governments keen on surveilling their citizens for intelligence purposes and corporations whose business models depend on accessing or distributing user data. If you're in the dark as to just how many businesses and government agencies gain access to our data in any simple online transaction, there are plenty of examples in the book to get you caught up. The permanence of that access is also incredibly troubling.

Some of my favorite chapters were "The Business of Surveillance" (Chapter 4), in which Schneier talks about how privacy is increasingly undervalued in the age of the Internet and social media; "Privacy" (Chapter 10), which addresses the argument that you shouldn't be worried about surveillance if you have nothing to hide; "Solutions for Government" (Chapter 13) and "Solutions for Corporations" (Chapter 14), which are pretty self-explanatory. "Political Liberty and Justice" (Chapter 7) also highlights important components of privacy as a security of free speech and political dissent, two essentials in a democracy. This chapter is particularly interesting to read because of the meteoric rise of Big Tech's political power over the years since the book was published in 2015. There's some arguments made that I would have probably readily agreed with back then, but have become more nuanced now.

No matter how much you agree or disagree with Schneier's stances, the one thing no one can dispute is just how much can change in five years (e.g., how much a single presidency can intensify the debates around our basic rights). Schneier has written a couple more book since then, in which I'm sure address more notable events in the years since <i>Data and Goliath</i>, but I haven't gotten around to reading those. In particular, I wonder what his response is to the recent <a href="https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2021/01/16/how-twitter-banned-trump/">deplatforming of Donald Trump</a> and <a href="https://www.nytimes.com/2021/01/09/technology/apple-google-parler.html">Parler</a> by tech giants, and whether his outlook has changed in the last five years. Regardless, this book serves as a great reflection on the imbalances of online power, the rapidly changing landscape of the Internet and what our democratic values really look like in the digital world.

<h3>other books</h3>
- <b><i>Drown</i> by Junot Díaz.</b> I found out about this book from a friend who convinced me to read it with her. It's a semi-autobiographical coming-of-age novel mostly narrated by Yunior, a kid from the Dominican Republic who immigrates to America along with the rest of his family. If I had to describe this book in one word, it would be <i>bleak.</i> If you're looking for a feel-good story about the "American dream" then this is definitely not it. Obviously, there are moments of joy throughout, but Díaz speaks with a truly gripping realism through Yunior, and it's this bleakness that makes the story so compelling. I actually started this book back in December, but the first few chapters weren't quite clicking with me and I put it aside for a few weeks. I'm glad I picked it back up though, because I really loved the second half.

- <b><i>The Color Purple</i> by Alice Walker.</b> I love, love, love this book so much. It's considered a classic and won a Pulitzer Prize, and it's not hard to see why. There are a lot of social and historical themes in the story, as it centers around the life of a Black woman named Celie Harris who lived during the early 1900's. At its core, however, the book is really a story about women. A lot of the media I typically consume in a day is written by, produced by and spoken by men, so to finally read a story that was focused so unapologetically on subjects like sisterhood and female sexuality was a refreshing change. The entire book is written as a series of letters, most of them written by Celie and addressed to God. The letters give the story a more intimate and personal form of narration than typical prose. It also means that the book is really easy to breeze through and finish quickly. I'd actually recommend against this, because this story actually covers the majority of Celie's adult life and doesn't play well with the fast-forward button. In fact, I didn't realize the absolute length of the timeline at first because I was reading through the book so quickly. Going through everything more slowly probably would have been a more appropriate way to absorb this story.

- <b><i>Recursion</i> by Blake Crouch.</b> This is a pretty fast-paced sci-fi story that sort of reads like an action movie. The science is neuroscience-based, so there are a lot of metaphysical, edge-of-consciousness, memory-adjacent themes. I'm not sure I was entirely convinced by the science or the philosophical motifs, because they tended to get overshadowed by all the action. That being said, it's a really interesting concept and I still found myself tempted to keep reading because I wanted to know what happened next. Overall, it wasn't exactly to my preferences and I think the story includes one too many sci-fi stereotypes, but I managed to finish.<a href="#footnote1"><sup>1</sup></a>

- <b><i>Identity Crisis</i> by John Sides, Michael Tesler and Lynn Vavreck.</b> As the title suggests, this book is all about how identity politics shaped the outcome of the 2016 election--for both Republicans <i>and</i> Democrats. It's an extremely data-heavy book full of graphs, charts and plots that summarize the results of voter surveys, polls and various other political studies. The main point in the book is that identity came to the forefrunt of the 2016 election, influencing how voters turned out and cast their ballots more than in any recent previous election. However, a lot of discussion is focused on the formation and history of identity, and whether or not Trump's victory was as unpredictable or surprising as many of us thought. Overall, the book read a bit dry--almost every sentence references some number or statistic. But ultimately, you get out of this book what it advertises--a quantitative analysis of a highly controversial election.

- <b><i>Red Sorghum</i> by Mo Yan.</b> Ever since he won the Nobel Prize in Literature, I've wanted to read a book by Mo Yan. I've been meaning to read more Chinese literature, so it all worked out. Previously, I've read <i>The Four Books</i> by Yan Lianke and like that novel, <i>Red Sorghum</i> is a story of one of the more tragic times in China's history--specifically, the Sino-Japanese War (Yan's novel is centered around the Cultural Revolution). I've never been able to get through graphic war movies that well, but I never imagined that a book could deliver the same level of intense imagery until I read this one. Certain points of the book were almost too hard for me to read, but it was all worth getting through.

I'd say this was a pretty diverse and satisfying selection! Next, I'm hoping to get through some books written by Asian American authors, a memoir or two and a book about modern art or filmmaking.

<div class="footnotes">
<hr align="left" size="1">
<section id="footnote1"><sup>1</sup>Okay, this is a bit of a lie. I may not have read the last 100 pages that carefully.</section>
</div>